A tool to scan a network for the connected devices scan for ports as well as services run automated scripts

 Nmap uses multiple ways to specify its targets:

- IP range using `-`: If you want to scan all the IP addresses from 192.168.0.1 to 192.168.0.10, you can write `192.168.0.1-10`
- IP subnet using `/`: If you want to scan a subnet, you can express it as `192.168.0.1/24`, and this would be equivalent to `192.168.0.0-255`
- Hostname: You can also specify your target by hostname, for example, `example.thm`
## scanning a local network

To scan a local network we use ARP to map the mac address from the locally connected wifi or ethernets and the response tells us the mac address which we can use to know the vendor of the NIC card and which can help us figure out the type of the target device

AttackBox Terminal

```shell-session
root@tryhackme:~# nmap -sn 192.168.66.0/24
Starting Nmap 7.92 ( https://nmap.org ) at 2024-08-07 13:49 EEST
Nmap scan report for XiaoQiang (192.168.66.1)
Host is up (0.0069s latency).
MAC Address: 44:DF:65:D8:FE:6C (Unknown)
Nmap scan report for S190023240007 (192.168.66.88)
Host is up (0.090s latency).
MAC Address: 7C:DF:A1:D3:8C:5C (Espressif)
Nmap scan report for wlan0 (192.168.66.97)
Host is up (0.20s latency).
MAC Address: 10:D5:61:E2:18:E6 (Tuya Smart)
Nmap scan report for 192.168.66.179
Host is up (0.10s latency).
MAC Address: E4:AA:EC:8F:88:C9 (Tianjin Hualai Technology)
[...]
Nmap done: 256 IP addresses (7 hosts up) scanned in 2.64 seconds
```

## scanning a remote network

AttackBox Terminal

```shell-session
root@tryhackme:~# nmap -sn 192.168.11.0/24
Starting Nmap 7.92 ( https://nmap.org ) at 2024-08-07 14:05 EEST
Nmap scan report for 192.168.11.1
Host is up (0.018s latency).
Nmap scan report for 192.168.11.151
Host is up (0.0013s latency).
Nmap scan report for 192.168.11.152
Host is up (0.13s latency).
Nmap scan report for 192.168.11.154
Host is up (0.22s latency).
Nmap scan report for 192.168.11.155
Host is up (2.3s latency).
Nmap done: 256 IP addresses (5 hosts up) scanned in 10.67 seconds
```

The Nmap output shows that five hosts are up. But how did Nmap discover this? To learn more, let’s see some sample traffic generated by Nmap. In the screenshot below, we can see the responses from two hosts:

- `192.168.11.1` is live and responded to the ICMP echo (ping) request.
- `192.168.11.2` seems down. Nmap sent two ICMP echo (ping) requests, two ICMP timestamp requests, two TCP packets to port 443 with the SYN flag set, and two TCP packets to port 80 with the ACK flag set. The target didn’t respond to any. We observe several ICMP destination unreachable packets from the `192.168.11.151` router.

It is worth noting that we can have more control over how Nmap discovers live hosts such as `-PS[portlist]`, `-PA[portlist]`, `-PU[portlist]` for TCP SYN, TCP ACK, and UDP discovery via the given ports. However, this is beyond the scope of this room.

As a final point, Nmap offers a list scan with the option `-sL`. This scan only lists the targets to scan without actually scanning them. For example, `nmap -sL 192.168.0.1/24` will list the 256 targets that will be scanned. This option helps confirm the targets before running the actual scan.

As we mentioned earlier, `-sn` aims to discover live hosts without attempting to discover the services running on them. This scan might be helpful if you want to discover the devices on a network without causing much noise. However, this won’t tell us which services are running. If we want to learn more about the network services running on the live hosts, we need a more “noisy” type of scan, which we will explore in the next task.

> -sn to see the live hosts on our network 
> -sL to only see the list of the target ips 

## port scanning

we want to discover the network services listening on these live hosts. By network service, we mean any process that is listening for incoming connections on a TCP or UDP port. Common network services include web servers, which usually listen on TCP ports 80 and 443, and DNS servers, which typically listen on UDP (and TCP) port 53.

## TCP ports
- first step would be (most preferably) to establish telnet
- for a telnet connection we require a tcp handshake 
	for that we have two options
	1. connectin scan where we do a full handshake and then nmap closes the handshake with a RST
	2. SYN scan this is a more stealthier scan where the handshake is terminated before completion
## UDP ports
services like DNS DHCP and NTP still use UDP because it is a faster connection option although less reliable

Nmap offers the option `-sU` to scan for UDP services. Because UDP is simpler than TCP, we expect the traffic to differ. 

### Limiting the Target Ports

Nmap scans the most common 1,000 ports by default. However, this might not be what you are looking for. Therefore, Nmap offers you a few more options.

- `-F` is for Fast mode, which scans the 100 most common ports (instead of the default 1000).
- `-p[range]` allows you to specify a range of ports to scan. For example, `-p10-1024` scans from port 10 to port 1024, while `-p-25` will scan all the ports between 1 and 25. Note that `-p-` scans all the ports and is equivalent to `-p1-65535` and is the best option if you want to be as thorough as possible.
- Tip: The most common services use a port number between 1 and 1024 for either UDP or TCP. These ports are also known as **well-known ports**. Use `-p1-1023` to scan for the well-known ports.

### Summary

|Option|Explanation|
|---|---|
|`-sT`|TCP connect scan – complete three-way handshake|
|`-sS`|TCP SYN – only first step of the three-way handshake|
|`-sU`|UDP scan|
|`-F`|Fast mode – scans the 100 most common ports|
|`-p[range]`|Specifies a range of port numbers – `-p-` scans all the ports|
## Version detection

### os detection

we can detect the os of a system using nmap and the function -0  but it is not. a precise answer rather a guess

### service and version detection

You discovered several open ports and want to know what services are listening on them. `-sV`enables version detection. This is very convenient for gathering more information about your target with fewer keystrokes.

  `-A`. This option enables OS detection, version scanning, and traceroute, among other things.

### Forcing the Scan

When we run our port scan, such as using `-sS`, there is a possibility that the target host does not reply during the host discovery phase (e.g. a host doesn’t reply to ICMP requests). 

Consequently, Nmap will mark this host as down and won’t launch a port scan against it. We can ask Nmap to treat all hosts as online and port scan every host, including those that didn’t respond during the host discovery phase. 

This choice can be triggered by adding the `-Pn` option.

### Summary

|Option|Explanation|
|---|---|
|`-O`|OS detection|
|`-sV`|Service and version detection|
|`-A`|OS detection, version detection, and other additions|
|`-Pn`|Scan hosts that appear to be down|
## Timing

running the scan at a normal speed might trigger an IDS 
to avoid that we have the option for 6 different speed templates

0 paranoid 
1 sneaky 
2 polite 
3 normal 
4 aggressive 
5 insane

A second helpful option is the number of parallel service probes. The number of parallel probes can be controlled with `--min-parallelism <numprobes>` and `--max-parallelism <numprobes>`.
The rate is provided as the _number of packets per second_. It is worth mentioning that the specified rate applies to the whole scan and not to a single host.

The last option we will cover in this task is `--host-timeout <time>`. This option specifies the maximum time you are willing to wait, and it is suitable for slow hosts or hosts with slow network connections.

|Option|Explanation|
|---|---|
|`-T<0-5>`|Timing template – paranoid (0), sneaky (1), polite (2), normal (3), aggressive (4), and insane (5)|
|`--min-parallelism <numprobes>`and `--max-parallelism <numprobes>`|Minimum and maximum number of parallel probes|
|`--min-rate <number>` and `--max-rate <number>`|Minimum and maximum rate (packets/second)|
|`--host-timeout`|Maximum amount of time to wait for a target host|
## OUTPUT controll

-v can be used to extract more info from a output 
further it has other levels too -v -vv -vvv

If all this verbosity does not satisfy your needs, you must consider the `-d` for debugging-level output. Similarly, you can increase the debugging level by adding one or more “d” or by specifying the debugging level directly. The maximum level is `-d9`; before choosing that, make sure you are ready for thousands of information and debugging lines.

You can select the scan report format as follows:

- `-oN <filename>` - Normal output
- `-oX <filename>` - XML output
- `-oG <filename>` - `grep`-able output (useful for `grep` and `awk`)
- `-oA <basename>` - Output in all major formats

Nmap would automatically use SYN scan (`-sS`) if you are running it with `sudo`privileges and will default to connect scan (`-sT`) if run as a local user. The reason is that crafting certain packets, such as sending a TCP SYN packet, requires root privileges.

|Option|Explanation|
|---|---|
|`-sL`|List scan – list targets without scanning|
|**_Host Discovery_**||
|`-sn`|Ping scan – host discovery only|
|**_Port Scanning_**||
|`-sT`|TCP connect scan – complete three-way handshake|
|`-sS`|TCP SYN – only first step of the three-way handshake|
|`-sU`|UDP Scan|
|`-F`|Fast mode – scans the 100 most common ports|
|`-p[range]`|Specifies a range of port numbers – `-p-` scans all the ports|
|`-Pn`|Treat all hosts as online – scan hosts that appear to be down|
|**_Service Detection_**||
|`-O`|OS detection|
|`-sV`|Service version detection|
|`-A`|OS detection, version detection, and other additions|
|**_Timing_**||
|`-T<0-5>`|Timing template – paranoid (0), sneaky (1), polite (2), normal (3), aggressive (4), and insane (5)|
|`--min-parallelism <numprobes>`and `--max-parallelism <numprobes>`|Minimum and maximum number of parallel probes|
|`--min-rate <number>` and `--max-rate <number>`|Minimum and maximum rate (packets/second)|
|`--host-timeout`|Maximum amount of time to wait for a target host|
|**_Real-time output_**||
|`-v`|Verbosity level – for example, `-vv` and `-v4`|
|`-d`|Debugging level – for example `-d` and `-d9`|
|**_Report_**||
|`-oN <filename>`|Normal output|
|`-oX <filename>`|XML output|
|`-oG <filename>`|`grep`-able output|
|`-oA <basename>`|Output in all major formats|
